page fault handling steps
1. CPU generates a logical address to find a page.
2. Page table indicates that page is not currently available.
3. OS Triggers a page fault.
4. Os searches the page in the secondary storage.
5. The page is loaded from disk to main memory(RAM)
6. Page table is updated.
7. CPU resumes it's execution.

Demand paging is a virtual memory management technique in which pages of a process are loaded into main memory(RAM) only when they are actually required.

Advantages of demand paging. 
1. memory is not loaded with unused pages.
2. pages are loaded into memory based on their demand. 
3. If a page doesn't have any call from the cpu, it will not be loaded.
4. increases degree of programming.
5. efficient use of memory.

Interrupt is a signal generated by a hardware or a software to get the attention of the cpu. When an interrupt signal is generated, the cpu temporarily suspends the execution of it's current program and transfers control to an interrupt service routine. 
steps of handling an interrupt.
1. An interrupt signal is generated by a device or an event.
2. CPU stores the current execution state, including program counter and registers.
3. cpu transfers control to an appropriate interrupt service routine(ISR) using interrupt vector Table
4. The ISR handles the interrupt properly.
5. After Completion, the CPU restores the process execution state and resumes the execution.


paging is a virtual memory management technique in which the logical address generated by the cpu is divided into fixed-size of blocks called pages, and the physical address of the main memory is divided into fixed-size of blocks called frames. The page size of the logical address is same as the frame size of the physical address. it supports non-contiguous memory allocation.

Thrashing is a phenomenon in which the cpu spends more time in handling page faults instead of executing the program instructions. It reduces the overall performance of the cpu and causes bottlenecking. 

Fragmentation is a phenomenon in which memory spaces are wasted due to inefficient allocation. Internal fragmentation occurs when there are available memory space exists in the allocated blocks. Meanwhile, External fragmentation occurs when free memory space is available but they are non-contiguous. 

Metrices to compare cpu scheduling algorithms.
1. CPU utilization: The amount of time the cpu remains busy, Need to be maximum.
2. Throughput: The number of processes done per unit of time, should be maximized.
3. Completion time: The amount of time a process takes to complete it's execution after arriving in the ready queue, should be minimized.
4. Waiting time: It is the total amount of time the process spends waiting in the ready queue. should be kept as low as possible.
5. Response time: After arriving in the ready queue, how much amount of time it stays there before 
getting executed for the  first time. For a responsive application, it should be minimized.

Deadlock is a situation in which a set of processes are permanently blocked because each of the processes in that set are allocated with some resources and waiting for another resource which is already held by another process.
Deadlock handling
1. Deadlock ignorance: used by most of the modern operating systems.
2. Deadlock prevention: managing the processes and resources in such a way, so that no deadlock occurs in the future.
3. Deadlock avoidance: avoiding the deadlock by using some algorithm, such as bankers algorithm.
4. DEadlock detection and handling: The os detects if there is any deadlock of the processes occurred. if found, the os handles the deadlock by one of these two mechanisms:
	a. process termination: Terminates one of the processes or all processes those are in the 	deadlock to break the deadlock.
	b. Resource preemption: The os forcibly takes a resource from a process and assign it to 	another process which is requesting this resource. 

Address translation Schemes:
1. CPU generates a logical address which contains two block, one is the page number and another is the page offset.
2. By using the page number of the logical address, the page is get searched in the page table.
3. if the page table shows that the page doesn't exist there, a page fault occurs, then the page fault is handled explicitely.
4. If the page table shows the page exists there, then from the page table, the frame number of the page is found. 
5. By using the frame number and the offset of the page, a physical address of the main memory is generated.
6. The page is then get searched in the physical memory and taken from there.

Dynamic storage allocation: is the process of allocating a process in the main memory dynamically, means the process can be of variable size and the memory spaces can also be of variable size, and they get allocated in the memory by various mechanisms.
1. First fit: in this mechanism, the first available space in the memory which is greater than or equal to the process size is the place where the process is allocated.
2. Next fit: it is same as the first fit, but here a pointer indicates that the searching of the fittest space must be start from the position where it's previous process is allocated.
3. Best fit: This allocation process finds the lowest sized space among all the available spaces which are greater than or equal to the process size.
4. Worst fit: This allocation process finds the largest sized space among all the available spaces which are greater than or equal to the process size.


HDD or Hard disk drive is a storage device which uses a circular disk to store data. Additional to the circular disk, it has a read/write head and spindle. It uses physical movement of the disk to access the data. As it uses physical movement, it is slower compared to SSD, but it larger in capacity and much cheaper per unit of storage.
SSD or Solid State Disk is also a Secondary storage device which uses flash memory instead of physical moving parts to store the data. As it has no moving parts, it is more convenient, faster than HDD and provides longebility. But it is lower in storage capacity and more expensive per unit of storage compared to HDD.

Critical section is the part of a program where shared data or resources are accessed. The critical section problem is to design a mechanism so that accessing the shared resources by processes doesn't proceed to data inconsistency.

These conditions must be hold to solve critical section problems.
1. Mutual exclusion: No resources are allocated by ore than one process in the critical section at a time.
2. Progress: If there is no  process in the critical section, one of the waiting processes must be allowed to enter.
3. Waited Boundary: There must be a limit  on how long a process should wait before entering in the critical section.
The critical section problem can be solved by these:
1. Mutex locks.
2. Semaphores.
3. Monitors.
4. Hardware based solution such as test and set

System call is occurs when a user program wants to get a service of the operating system.
Control Flow of system call:
1. User program invokes a system call.
2. System call goes to the operating system.
3. Mode switched from user mode to kernel mode.
4. The kernel of the operating system validates and detects the system call properly.
5. If the validation or detection fails, it raises an interrupt and return the control to the user mode.
6. Otherwise the kernel executes the call in the kernel mode.
7. After completion of the service user program invoked, the mode is again switched to user mode.

System calls are more time consuming than the normal function call because they involve mode switching(User->kernel->User), call validation and protection checks and restoring the current state. But these amount of time is bearable compared to the advantages of the system call, because system call makes the connection between the user or user program with the kernel of the operating system.


Advantages of multithreaded programming:
1. Better response time due to multiple threads, better for responsive applications.
2. Higher Throughput because multiple threads are executing concurrently.
3. Better resource utilization. As the threads of a process shares the resources of that process among them.
4. Best utilization of modern multi-core processors.


A process is a program that is currently in execution. 
Two parts:
1. Program code: The executable instruction of the program that is stored in memory.
2. PCB(Process Control Block): A Data structure managed by the operating system for each processes which contains all of the important information about a process. PCB Block:
a. Process id.
b. Process state.
3. Program Counter.
4. Resisters.
5. Process Scheduling information
6. Memory management information.
7. I/O status information.

program vs process:
Program:
1. A passive entity stored in the disk.
2. No executable state or resources.
3. No association with PCB
Process:
1. An active entity of the program that is in execution.
2. Has execution state and resources.
3. Associated with PCB

Preemptive scheduling:
Preemptive scheduling is a CPU scheduling technique in which a process is not always completely executed after it get started. That means the os can anytime stops the execution of a process based on some criteria(such as priority or timing).


Address binding is the process of mapping logical addresses generated by the CPU to physical addresses of the actual main memory.
Types:
1. Compile time: The Generation of Logical to physical address is done by a compiler when the process is in the compilation state.
2. Load time: The Binding occurs By the Loader when the process is loaded into the Memory.
3. Execution time: This type of address binding is occurred when the process is currently being executed by the CPU.
multistep processing of a user program
source program ->Compiler->Object Program->Linker->executable Program->Loader->main Memory